Current research relates multiple control practices as packages, systems, or accumulations. This relationship signifies that management control practices exist as multiplicities and interact in various ways. These interactions strengthen management control practices. However, this generalisation misses the when of relations, which is a problem, as management control practices are not always related, for example, because they often have their own domain attached to an organisational entity’s tasks. This paper reports on a study of a firm’s (Automaker) management control of its supply chain. This was organised as two types of concern – risk and performance management – that were delegated to two organisational entities each having its associated management control practices. This organisation was a delegation of responsibilities, decision rights and control practices. The study draws on Michel Callon’s distinction between framing and overflow to analyse the framing activity involved in upholding this separation and the overflows stemming from the difficulties of upholding strong framings. In effect, the paper discusses when risk and performance management practices are related, un-related and re-related and concludes that the when helps explain how the relation works to rearrange the importance of the framings and via overflows to introduce completely new framing devices. 1. Introduction There are often multiple management control practices in a firm. They may be a system of complementary/substitutive tools and procedures (Grabner & Moers, 2013; Güldenpfennig et al., 2021), a package of different tools and procedures (Malmi & Brown, 2008), or a gradual accumulation of tools and procedures that make sense to individuals (Cooper et al., 2019). This multiplicity of management control practices helps managers perform their jobs either because they are functionally relevant (Gerdin, 2020; Grabner & Moers, 2013; Malmi & Brown, 2008) or because they make sense to managers’ understanding of the world and their role in it (Cooper et al., 2019; Yu & Mouritsen, 2020). These are situations where the relations between multiple management control practices support a firm’s aspirations for control. However, what does it mean that they are related? After all, each management control practice may cater to its own domain. Budgeting practices may be related to strategy practices, but they also have ’ 3 their own practice that organises the firm’s financial planning, delegates the right to spend money, and attempts to coordinate disparate actors’ targets and resources (Covaleski et al., 2003). Likewise, operational, accounting, and human resource management control practices, even if they may all be related to performance management, they also each has their own domain (Hansen, 2021). It thus seems that diverse management control practices are not necessarily always related, as they are delegated to different organisational entities (Armstrong, 1985; Lowe & Koh, 2007; Yu & Mouritsen, 2020). Therefore, are management control practices always related? Are they related sometimes? Are they related only in certain situations? What happens when they are related? There are no obvious answers to these questions, but they do indicate that management control practices may function differently when they act as a singular entity or in relation to other management control practices. Therefore, this paper asks the following research question: When are there relations between management control practices? This general question harbours concerns about (a) how management control practices differ from each other, (b) the timing of their relatedness, and (c) their roles when they are (un)related. To investigate this research question, this paper draws on the field of inter-organisational relations. In particular the paper addresses a key tension in supply chains which says that suppliers have to become ever more productive which may decrease their ability to be profitable, and that suppliers have to be resilient and maintain a position in the supply chain, and thus uphold its integrity, which however, requires their profitability to be significant. This is a tension to which management control practices are alert. Learning from different authors, including Williamson (1998) and Castells (2000), this study of inter- organisational relations benefits from focusing on the transaction flow between entities, such as focal and supplier firms. Transactions are the objects (products, materials, tools, information etc.) that make up the relationship between firms, and management control practices are the means to make them amenable to intervention and control. Focal firms organise themselves around the transaction flow by delegating responsibilities to their organisational entities to maintain an uninterrupted transaction flow. These responsibilities are facilitated by management control practices, and as responsibilities differ, management control practices likely also differ among these organisational entities. Delegation implies that organisational entities have separate and different tasks and goals. There is no obvious way in which such different entities are related, as delegation, in principle, reduces the need for relations. When would they then become related? ’ 4 To study the delegation of responsibilities and their associated management control practices in relation to transactions between focal and supplier firms, Michel Callon’s (1998a) distinction between framing and overflow is useful. Framing is the effort made to put together one or more management control practices and delegate them to organisational entities. Framing here implies making management control practices coherent and relevant to an overall concern. As the overall concern may be complex, such as the transaction flow, a task for framing is to determine how many organisational entities are to be responsible for various parts of the concern. This separates the management control practices from each other in relation to the overall concern. Framing is the process of separating out the things that are made to belong to the separate management control practices and make them clear and coherent. However, framing implies that this coherence is achieved at the cost that not everything that could be part of the particular management control practice is included. Certain aspects and dilemmas are omitted from framing. This may generate overflow, which appears when these omissions become increasingly heavy and problematic. Overflow appears when it is possible to question whether the framings hold and are good enough to handle the tensions pertaining to the whole transaction flow. Therefore, there may be relations between different framings—different management control practices—but these are not obvious all the time. They are only obvious when they require things from each other that are difficult to deliver. Then they relate to each other and then overflows may occur even if it is not a priori obvious when the outside of the framing will create an overflow. This is a dynamic theory of management control practices where overflows happen because the framing of a practice performs rather than misfires. To study framing and overflow in relation to a transaction flow, this paper draws on empirical materials from a firm’s relations with suppliers. This case considers the transaction flow as framed by two different concerns. One concern was the risk of suppliers being removed from the supply chain due to their potential bankruptcy. This required suppliers to be ‘financially sound.’ Another concern was the performance and productivity of the transaction flow through a target costing procedure, which required suppliers to become more productive over time and potentially becoming ‘financially weak.’ This is a paradox. The transaction flow was amenable to control by framing risk as a problem for procurement departments and framing performance as a problem for engineering (new products) and purchasing (existing products) departments. The delegation of tasks and associated management control practices and tools were expected to handle both sides of the flow, largely independently of each other. In effect, most of the time, these management control practices were not related as practices; they were only related when they could not honour their responsibility. ’ 5 When suppliers went bankrupt too fast, partly because the target costing procedure was harsh and their profitability was challenged, the two management control practices were related. This was a relation of overflow, where the firm then had to invent new efforts to reconstruct the transaction flow by adding new things to the framing activity. While the framing in risk and performance was an attempt to economise the transaction flow, with each overflow, new and costly investments had to be made. Thus, relations do not always exist; in this case, when they existed, they were related because of their association with overflow, which happens, paradoxically, because the framings—as practices—enable a workable delegation. 2. Theory linkages 2.1. Multiple control systems A design may consist of many elements or many types of management control practices that contribute to the firm’s aspiration for being in control (Bedford et al., 2016; Busco et al., 2007; Friis et al., 2015; Gerdin, 2020; Grabner & Moers, 2013; Malmi & Brown, 2008; van der Meer-Kooistra & Scapens, 2008). These different management control practices exist simultaneously and engage with different aspects of business activity. They may also exist as accumulations of different management control practices in different organisational situations and with different agendas and time horizons (Christner & Strömsten, 2015; Cooper et al., 2019; Hald & Mouritsen, 2018; Revellino & Mouritsen, 2009; Skærbæk & Tryggestad, 2010; Yu & Mouritsen, 2020). All these ways that management control practices relate are different, but in all cases they appear to ‘add up’ in the sense that they all contribute to or at least do not stand in the way of the firms’ totality of management control practices. Alternately, management control practices may compete when their co-existence is contradictory, leading to mutually exclusive management control practices (Christensen et al., 2019; Mouritsen, 1999; Mouritsen et al., 2009). In this situation, multiple management control practices lead the organisation in different directions, for example, into both insourcing and outsourcing strategies (Mouritsen, 1999; Mouritsen et al., 2009), into the direction of both the financial economy and the industrial economy (Ahrens, 1996; Lowe & Koh, 2007; Mouritsen, 1998), or in the direction of both quality and standardisation (Fischer & Ferlie, 2013). These are contradictory because they would ’ 6 imbue the firm’s aspirations for being in control with such different orientations that the aspiration would be incoherent and impossible to realise, thus making these management control practices ‘incompatible’ (Christensen et al., 2019). It is therefore reasonable to suggest that management control practices have to be “balanced” (Stouthuysen et al., 2019; van der Kolk et al., 2020). Balancing implies that managers intervene and attempt to add to and repair management control practices to incorporate unforeseen problems and dilemmas. This may be a long, continuing process of fitting management control practices to each other over time (Andon et al., 2007; Mouritsen, 2005; Quattrone & Hopper, 2001). However, this raises the question of whether management control practices are connected all the time and everywhere. Are there always relations between management control practices so that balancing is a continuous affair? It is likely that they are not always balanced because management control practices are also differentiated to cater to different organisational problems. There are differences between control practices in operations, in human resources, and in accounting and performance management practices (Ahrens, 1996; Armstrong, 1985; Hansen, 2021; Lowe & Koh, 2007; Yu & Mouritsen, 2020). This suggests that there is a considerable division of labour between organisational entities/departments that requires them to focus on different tasks to handle their responsibilities and therefore draw on different management control practices. Separating management control practices is logical because organisational structure makes it possible for individual managers to manage their set of delegated problems independently of other managers’ efforts (Kilmann, 1983). The subsequent coordination problem is approached by budgeting and planning activities (Covaleski et al., 2003; Ezzamel et al., 2012). Therefore, there are reasons to presume that the separation of management control practices is as likely, or even more likely, as their relatedness. This demonstrates the relevance of the research question: When are management control practices related? 2.2. Supplier risk and performance management To study the question of when management control practices are related, this paper draws on empirical evidence from the role of management control practices in inter-organisational relationships. There is already burgeoning literature about the variety of such control practices (Caglio & Ditillo, 2008; Dekker, 2004, 2008; Håkansson & Lind, 2004, 2006). Management control practices mediate the relationship between focal firm and supplier, drawing on tools and procedures that managers draw on to maintain or develop interaction (Hald & Mouritsen, 2018; Miller & ’ 7 O’Leary, 2007; Mouritsen & Thrane, 2006). Management control practices articulate the forms in which the focal firm and supplier realise the relationship. Therefore, open book systems (Agndal & Nilsson, 2010; Alenius et al., 2015; Kajüter & Kulmala, 2005; Windolph & Moeller, 2012), target costing (Carr & Ng, 1995; Mouritsen et al., 2001), competency maps (Hald & Mouritsen, 2018; Mouritsen & Thrane, 2006), road maps (Miller & O’Leary, 2007), various forms of collective planning activities and governance (Håkansson & Lind, 2004; Zahir-Ul-Hassan et al., 2016), and partner selection mechanisms (Dekker, 2008; Ding et al., 2013; Reusen & Stouthuysen, 2019) enable the coordination between parties. Extant research here shows how interactions can be prolonged and develop over time. It shows that it is possible to maintain coordination across the supply chain via management control practices, even if parties may not share interests. A main conclusion of extant research is that the management of tensions is handled and reduced with control systems. The general problem in the management of inter-organisational relations has often been suggested to be the dual issues of risk and performance management (Wieland & Wallenburg, 2012). Supplier risk arises because of a focus on lowering production and sourcing cost (Norrman & Jansson, 2004; Verbano & Venturini, 2011; Zsidisin & Ritchie, 2008). Khan et al. (2008, p. 141) stated that “global sourcing and offshore manufacturing appears to bring potential benefits to a firm, specifically cost savings driven by lower labour costs. As a consequence in many cases companies are exposed to greater risk and uncertainty in their supply chain since they are too focused on costs and cost reduction at the expense of other considerations” (p. 141). Cost reduction generates two types of risk. First, it generates relational risk, which “relates to a partner’s inability to capture a fair share of the rents generated by an alliance and arises from behavioural uncertainty of the alliance partner, coupled with investments in alliance-specific assets and incomplete contracts” (Anderson et al., 2014, p. 5). Relational risks are a consequence of transaction characteristics, such as a high transaction size and investment in specific assets. This creates lock-in when “the cost of “starting over” with a new partner exceeds the cost of continuing with an existing partner” (Anderson & Dekker, 2009, p. 206). Second, cost reduction generates performance risk, which occurs when partners collaborate fully. It is “found in all decisions that put execution of the firm’s strategy in jeopardy” (Anderson & Dekker, 2009, p. 206), including supplier failure. Outsourcing has generally been related to risk in the supply chain since much of a manufacturer’s production happens under the jurisdiction of other firms. In some industries, such as the automotive ’ 8 industry, the costs of supplied components amount to more than 80% of the total cost (Zsidisin & Ritchie, 2008). Once transactions have been outsourced, transaction characteristics, such as asset specificity and transaction size, generate relational and performance risk. Such risks are often managed by design efforts, such as the selection of suppliers and development of contracts with a trusting relationship (Ding et al., 2013). High risk levels also seem to favour more inclusive and specific contracts and the use of supply chain practices, such as target setting through target costing, operational reviews, and joint problem solving (Ding et al., 2013). The focus of this literature thus far has been to define the problems associated with the design of the relationship, and performance and risk have been noted as two central concerns. The designs are understood to prevent risks from materialising, and therefore, they are mechanisms that would mitigate disruption. However, this reasonable idea is rarely tested as a practice. This is the aim of the current analysis. 2.3. Framing and overflow Design can be understood as an outcome of a process of framing by which actors create a boundary around things to consider when an organisational entity is equipped with responsibility. This is the type of problem that Michel Callon (1998a) proposed to analyse by a distinction between framing and overflow. Callon was generally interested in how the economy is made practicable. His suggestion was to look towards the tools and devices used to single out products as objects, enable profit calculation, and transfer products and services from one actor to another (Çalışkan & Callon, 2009; Callon, 1998c, 2007, 2016; Callon et al., 2002; Callon & Muniesa, 2005; Muniesa & Callon, 2007). Callon was intrigued by seemingly small and mundane technologies, such as accounting, which create the infrastructure to differentiate products, sellers, and buyers, enabling trade. To Callon (1998b), such small devices help actors to perform in the economy, which are understood as techno- economic networks that are “a coordinated set of heterogeneous actors which interact more or less successfully to develop, produce, distribute and diffuse methods for generating goods and services” (Callon, 1998a, p. 133). The network is held together to “the extent to which the processes of translation and its circulation of intermediaries lead to agreement” (Callon, 2009, p. 144). Intermediaries are tools, such as accounting, and the processes of translation are the management control practices that draw on these tools (see also Ascui & Lovell, 2011; Christensen et al., 2019; Christensen & Skærbæk, 2007; Georg & Justesen, 2017; Skærbæk & Tryggestad, 2010; Vinnari & Skærbæk, 2014). ’ 9 Framing is an attempt to separate something from its environment. It is an operation of defining what is inside and what is outside. As such, it is a ‘cut’ that puts otherwise interdependent activities on two sides of a divide. As Callon (1998a) mentions, a firm may be responsible for its profitability but disregard its pollution, which may be put outside the firm via framing. Framing is a method of identifying and organising the entities being considered. To give such entities the capacity to think and act, Callon (1998b, p. 23) underscores the role of tools, such as accounting, that not only describe things but perform them as they “contribute powerfully to shaping, simply by measuring… the reality that they measure.” In this sense, framing is not only a design but also an installation of a set of dispositions developed by the tools that help realise it via processes of performativity (see also Busco & Quattrone, 2017; Miller & Power, 2013; Mouritsen et al., 2009; Yu & Mouritsen, 2020). However, to Callon, this performativity is fragile because framing is always challenged by the things that it has put outside. He (1998a, p. 255) offers the following consideration: Framing is costly because overflows happen all the time, since they are fed by multiple sources and flow down multiple channels. Framing cannot be achieved by contractual incentives alone, but ensure that certain courses of action are followed and at the same time generate externalities; this costly framing process is necessarily incomplete: first because a wholly hermetic frame is a contradiction in terms, and second because flows are always bidirectional, overflows simply being the inevitable corollary of the requisite links with the surrounding environment. Framing produces boundaries by separating things from other things in an ongoing flow of activity. Thus, framing creates clarity, reduces ambiguity, defines priorities, and produces focus that are mobilized by its tools and makes it perform. It singles out objects (such as products and suppliers), subjects (such as decision makers) and interventions (via the priorities made durable by tools). However, framing may always overflow because the very notion of the frame implies that important links remain outside and therefore will not be considered systematically. It asks questions about which objects to include (which suppliers are important enough to be recognised?), subjects (which decision makers are responsible for which suppliers?), and which tools (e.g. is risk to be understood as financial or technological risk?). Framing therefore does not include everything that could have been relevant but only those that are made the concerns of a manager/organisational entity. Framing frees action from its complex context and therefore makes it amenable to management, but the effects of this action cannot be freed from the context that the framing has put outside its boundaries. This ’ 10 means that there could have been other ways of identifying objects (e.g. by capability), subjects (e.g. skills) and tools (e.g. ones that trade off difficult concerns). The point is that framing makes the world clear and amenable to intervention. But framings also forget the things that are not taken into account. These things to not cede to exist, though. They still exist but are not taken care of. There are other objects, there are other subjects and there are other management control processes that are not taken into account. Callon (1998a) proposes that coordination and alignment happen when the framing is not challenged. He termed this a ‘cold’ period where “[a]ctors are identified, interests are stabilized, p